The Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IIT Madras or IITM) is a public technical university located in Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India. It is one of the eight public Institutes of Eminence of India. As an Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), IIT Madras is also recognised as an Institute of National Importance.[5]

Founded in 1959 with technical, academic and financial assistance from the then government of West Germany, IITM was the third Indian Institute of Technology established by the Government of India.[6][7] IIT Madras has consistently ranked as the best engineering institute in India by the Ministry of Education's National Institutional Ranking Framework since the ranking's inception in 2016.[8][9][10]

History
Main article: History of Indian Institutes of Technology
In 1956, the West German Government rendered technical assistance to establish a state of the art engineering institute in India. Soon, the first Indo-German agreement was signed in Bonn, West Germany in 1959 for the establishment of the Indian Institute of Technology in Madras (now Chennai). IIT Madras was started with technical, academic and financial assistance from the Government of West Germany and was at the time the largest international educational project sponsored by the West German government. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany has agreed to provide the following assistance in the establishment of a higher technological institute at Madras:

A workshop, laboratory equipment, and a library whose total value does not exceed ₹1.8 crore (equivalent to ₹166 crores or $20 million in 2024) .[11]
Twenty German professors to serve at the institute for a period of four to five years
Four German foremen for the workshops of the institute for two years
Facilities for the training of twenty Indian teachers in German institutions[12]
This has led to several collaborative research efforts with universities and institutions in Germany over the years.[13] Although official support from the German government has ended, several research efforts involving the DAAD programme and Humboldt Fellowships still exist.

The Indian Institute of Technology, Madras started functioning with the first batch of 120 students being admitted in July 1959 to the first year of the Engineering Course.[14] The institute was inaugurated in 1959, by the then Union Minister for Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs. The first batch had an overall strength of 120 students from across India.[15] In 1961, the IITs were declared to be Institutes of National Importance. The first convocation ceremony was held on 11 July 1964, with Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, then the president of India, delivering the convocation address and awarding the degrees to the inaugural batch of students.[16] The institute got its first women students in the BTech batch of 1966.[17] IIT Madras celebrated its Golden Jubilee in 2009, and its Diamond Jubilee in 2019.[18]